# S3 - Simple Storage Service
## What is S3?
- Stores files like *objects*.
	- Stores them as key-value pairs: 
	Key: file-name
	value: object/file
	version-id: (Important for versioning)
	metadata: (data abut data)
	sub-resources: ACLs, Torrents, etc.
	- Files are stored in virtual folder like storage called *Buckets*
- S3 has a **universal namespace**
- During creation a specific region needs to be choosen, where bucket will be created.
- Example URL:
	https://s3-[region-in-which-bucket-is-created].amazonaws.com/[bucket-name]
	ie: https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/acloudguru
- Files stored are spread accross multiple devices (within same data-center) and multiple facilities (data-center)
- Files can range from *0 Bytes to 5 TB*
- S3 allows *Unlimited Storage*
- OS cannot be installed on S3
- **Data Consistency**
	- *Read After Write* for **NEW PUTS** 
	- *Eventual Consistency* for **OVERWRITE PUTS and DELETES** (Can take some time to propogate)

## S3 Storage Tiers/Classes
1. S3 Standard
	- 99.99% availability
	- 99.99999999999(11x9s) % durability.
	- Minimum Storage Duration : N/A
	- First Byte Latency (Time taken to read the first byte of data) : milliseconds
	- High storage cost but No retrieval Fee
2. S3 : IA (Infrequently Accessed)
	- 99.90% availability
	- 99.99999999999(11x9s) % durability.
	- Minimum Storage Duration : 30 Days
	- First Byte Latency (Time taken to read the first byte of data) : milliseconds
	- Low storage cost but Has retrieval Fee
3. S3 One Zone : IA
	- 99.50% availability
	- 99.99999999999(11x9s) % durability.
	- Minimum Storage Duration : 30 Days
	- First Byte Latency (Time taken to read the first byte of data) : milliseconds
	- Low storage cost but Has retrieval Fee
4. S3 : Intelligent Tiering (Introduced in 2018)
	- Data is moved accross tiers automatically based on usage
	- There is no performance impact or operational overhead
5. S3 Glacier
	- N/A availability
	- 99.99999999999(11x9s) % durability.
	- Minimum Storage Duration : 90 Days
	- First Byte Latency (Time taken to read the first byte of data) : minutes to hours (configurable)
	- Low storage cost but has retrieval Fee
6. S3 Glacier Deep Archive
	- N/A availability
	- 99.99999999999(11x9s) % durability.
	- Minimum Storage Duration : 180 Days
	- First Byte Latency (Time taken to read the first byte of data) : upto 12 hours (configurable)
	- Lowest storage cost but has retrieval Fee

## S3 Features
1. Cross Region Replication (For enhanced durability)
2. S3 Transfer Acceleration (For uploads)
3. S3 Versioning
4. S3 Encryption
5. MFA Delete (For avoiding accidental deletes)
6. S3 Lifecycle Rules

## S3 Access Control
- Newly created buckets are PRIVATE.
- Access can be provided to user using IAM policies or resource-bases policies
- Access control can be achieved using resource-based polcies as,
	1. Bucket Policies : Applicable for the entire bucket (or a subgroup using wild cards)
		- All policies are applicable to all the objects in the bucket
		- Similar access control can be provided using IAM policy
	2. Access Control Lists : Can be applied to individual files
		- It's more of a legacy service, AWS now recommends using IAM or bucket policies over ACLs 

## S3 Logging
- Logging can be enabled such that all requests made to bucket can be sent to *another bucket or another bucket in another account.*

## S3 Encryption
- Encryption in Transit: SSL/TLS
- Encryption at REST (Server Side Encryption):
	1. S3 Managed Keys : SSE-S3
	2. AWS Key Management Service, Managed Keys : SSE-KMS
	3. Server Side Encryption with Customer Provided Keys : SSE-C
- Encryption at REST (Client Side Encryption)

## S3 Versioning
- When versioning enabled, Stores all versions of an object. Works as a great backup tool.
- Even when a file is deleted, *a delete marker is set as the latest version*.
- Once enabled, **versioning cannot be disabled**, only suspended.
- Older versions can be deleted permenantly, also MFA can be enabled to provide additional layer of security.
- Integrates with Lifecycle Rules.

## S3 Lifecycle Rules
- Automatically moves Objects between different tiers, as per rules set by user.
	- e.g: After a certain period of time, data can be moved from S3 Standard to IA and then later to Glacier.
- Versioning can be integrated with Lifecycle rules, such that previous version can be maintained seperately than the current version.
	- e.g: current version can be moved a few days after the previous versions have been moved.
- Expiration (placing delete marker on any object) and permenant deletion can be scheduled.

## S3 Cross Region Replication (CRR)
- *Versioning must be enabled on both source and destination buckets*.
- Regions must be unique (cannot move from a bucket in us-east-1 to another bucket in us-east-1).
- When CRR is first applied, **existing files are not replicated automatically**.
	- All subsequent file will be replicated automatically.
- *Delete Markers are not replicated*.
- *Deleting individual versions/delete markers will not be replicated*.

## S3 Multipart Uploads
- For files larger than 100MB it is recommended to use multi-part upload to upload the file
- Multiple files can be uploaded in parallel=
- Files upto 5TB can be uploaded using multi-part upload
- Without multipart upload, a single upload can handle upto 5GB

## S3 Transfer Acceleration
- Allows user to upload faster.
- This is achieved by making users upload to the nearest edge location.
	- Then AWS transfers them to the respective S3 region using their optimised networking.
- User gets a distinct URL:
[bucket-name].s3-accelerate.amazonaws.com

# CDN - Content Delivery Network
- CDN caches webpages and web content to a user based on geographical locations, origin of webpage and CDN server.
- The content is cached when a user from any geographic location access that content for the first time. 
	- When another user tries to access the same content from the same geographic location, the content is directly fetched from the cached location.
- Terminologies:
	1. Edge Location: Location where the content is cached.
	2. Origin: Original files that needs to be distributed, this can be :
		1. S3 Bucket
		2. EC2 Instance
		3. Elastic Load Balancer
		4. Route53
	3. Distribution: Collection of Edge Locations that consist of CDN
- Types of CDNs:
	1. Web Distribution - Typically used for Websites
	2. RTMP - Used for Media Streaming (like netflix)
- **Objects are cached for a particular Time To Live  (TTL), that can be customised.**
- **Objects that has been cached can be cleared before TTL, but you will be charged for the same**.

## Edge Location (Read & Write)
- Content from edge location is READ by enabling CDN.
- Content can be WRITTEN to edge location by enabling transfer acceleration.

# Snowball (For Import/Export)
- Used for large scale data transfer from on-prem system to S3.
	- Transfering over internet is costly, time-consuming and insecure.
	- Same can be done using Snowball at 1/5th of the cost.
- Snowball comes at various flavors:
	1. Snowball comes at 50TB to 80TB size.
	2. Snowball Edge comes at 100TB size with lambda like compute capabilities - mostly used to run local workloads in remote or offline locations.
	3. AWS Snowmobile - A huge tractor that can store upto 100PB per snowmobile.
- You can also export from S3 using Snowball.

# Storage Gateway
- Connects on-premise Software appliance with cloud based storage.
- Storage gateway is available as a VM Image that can be installed on a host in data-center.
- Storage gateway options:
	1. File Gateway:
		- Used to store flat files.
		- All On premise files are directly stored in S3.
		- All files can be accessed as local files in your on-prem system.
		- While using AWS console, all S3 features are made available to all the files. 
	2. Volume Gateway:
		- Stores only incremental backups - only changed blocks are stored (saving space)
		- All snapshots are compressed (again saving space)
		1. Stored Volumes:
			- Entire volume is backed up as snapshots to Amazon EBS Snapshots.
			- Original volume is untouched.
			- A great backup tool.
		2. Cached Volumes:
			- Enables using S3 as main storage (entire dataset is on cloud).
			- Only, most frequently accessed data is cached on premise storage.
			- This provides users with unlimited and scalable storage (S3) to work with.
 	3. Tape Gateway:
		- Tape drives are used by organizations to archive their data.
		- These archieved data can be migrated to cloud using Tape Gateway.

**READ S3 FAQs BEFORE GOING TO EXAM.**

**From FAQs:**
1. How should one choose which region to store his/her data in?
You may want to store your data in a Region that...
	- ...is near to your customers, your data centers, or your other AWS resources in order to reduce data access latencies.
	- ...is remote from your other operations for geographic redundancy and disaster recovery purposes.
	- ...enables you to address specific legal and regulatory requirements.
	- ...allows you to reduce storage costs. You can choose a lower priced region to save money.
2. S3 Pricing model?
	- Some prices vary across Amazon S3 Regions. Billing prices are based on the location of your bucket.
	- There is no Data Transfer charge for data transferred within an Amazon S3 Region via a COPY request.
		- However, Data transferred via a COPY request between AWS Regions is charged.
	- There is no Data Transfer charge for data transferred between Amazon EC2 and Amazon S3 within the same region.
		- However, data transferred between Amazon EC2 and Amazon S3 across all other regions is charged.
	- Storage cost is calculated on per-hour storage basis,
		- Keeping 100GB for first 20 days and 500GB for next 10 days will incur charges as (100GBx24hoursx20days + 200GBx24hoursx10days)
	- Network Data In and Out Data Transfer Fee.
	- PUT, COPY, POST, LIST, GET and other requests made are also chargeable.
3. How am I charged if my Amazon S3 buckets are accessed from another AWS account?
	- Normal Amazon S3 pricing applies when your storage is accessed by another AWS Account. Alternatively, you may choose to configure your bucket as a Requester Pays bucket, in which case the requester will pay the cost of requests and downloads of your Amazon S3 data.
4. Setting up trash, recycle bin, or rollback window on my Amazon S3 objects to recover from deletes and overwrites? 
	- Versioning and Lifecycle rules can be used in conjunction to move old versions to Glacier and preserve it for 100 days, giving one a recovery window or 100 days.
5. What happens when one deletes an object from a storage before it's minimum storage time?
	- One will be charged for the full minimum time,
		e.g: S3 Glacier has a 90 days of minimum storage time, if one deletes an object within 20 days from glacier, he/she will be charged for the full 90 days period.