# EC2 - Elastic Compute Cloud

## What is EC2 ?

- Provides resizable compute capacity on cloud
- Can be quickly scaled up and down, as our compute requirements change

## Use Cases

1. Hosting a web application such as WordPress
2. Operating an enterprise application, such as an ERP application
3. Transforming or analyzing data, such as encoding video files

## Steps to Launch an EC2 machine

1. Choose a Region (from top right management console)
2. Goto EC2 service from navigation bar
3. Click on Launch Instance

	1. Choose AMI
		- My AMIs
		- AWS MarketPlace
		- Community AMIs
	2. Choose Instance Type (more about types below)
	3. Configure Instance
		- Number of instances
		- Network, subnet and Auto-assign public ip address options
		- IAM Role
		- Shutdown behaviour, termination protection? and monitoring
		- Tenacy (shared or exclusive)
	4. Add Storage
		- Size
		- SSD or HDD
		- Delete on termination ?
		- Encryption
	5. Tags (Multiple can be added)
		- Name
		- Value
	6. Configure Security Group
		- Name and Description
		- Rules
	7. Review
	8. Select or Create a new Key Pair

## Types of EC2 Pricing Models

1. On Demand:
	- Pay a fixed rate by the hour (or by the second)
	- Use as long as you want
2. Reserved:
	- Reserve a machine on a contract basis (1 year or 3 year terms)
	- Get significant discount for paying upfront.
	- Reserved pricing model is further divided into 3 types:
		1. Standard Reserved:
			- upto 75% discount
			- the longer the contract the higher the payment and thus higher the discount
			- Fixed machine type (e.g: if requested for '2GB ram, 100GB storage', you will be stuck with it for the entire contract)
		2. Convertible Reserved:
			- upto 54% discount
			- Machine type can be changed after reservation.
		3. Scheduled Reserved:
			- Launch a machine between the time window you specify.
			- Schedule can be a fraction of a day (Daily employee login and logout), a week (online sales), or a month.
3. Spot:
	- Similar to stock markets, bid any amount for an instance capacity.
	- The machine will be up as long as the price is well inside the bid price.
		- Machine price fluctuates according to the demand.
	- Machine will be terminated as soon as the machine price crosses the bid price.
4. Dedicated Hosts:
	- Physical EC2 servers that are reserved for your use only.
	- Can be purchased on Demand (hourly) or as a reservation (yearly)

## When to use What?

1. On Demand:
	- Applications with short term (a sudden increase in users), spiky or unpredictable workloads.
	- Testing and Development
	- Companies who are unable to pay money upfront
2. Reserved:
	- Applications with steady or predictable workloads
	- Production use-cases
	- Companies who can make upfront payments.
3. Spot:
	- Applications that have flexible start and end times (analysis of a huge dataset)
	- Applications that are only feasible at low compute prices
	- Users with urgent computing needs
4. Dedicated Hosts:
	- When regulatory requirements does not allow multi-tenant virtualization (aws like cloud based architecture that allow a single hardware to be used by multiple customers)
	- When software licenses you have purchased does not allow multi tenancy or cloud based deployments.

## EC2 Instance Types

F1 = FPGA Applications\
I3 = High Speed Storage, IOPS = NOSQL, DBs, Warehousing etc.\
G3 = Graphics Intensive = Video encoding\
H1 = High Disk Throughput = Mapreduce, HDFS, MapR-FS\
T3 = Low cost, General Purpose = Web Servers, Small DBs\
D2 = Dense Storage = File Server, Warehousing, Hadoop\
R5 = Memory Optimised = Memory Intensive DBs/Apps\
M5 = General Purpose = Application Servers\
C5 = Compute Optimised = CPU Intensive Application\
P3 = Graphics, General Purpose GPU = Machine learning, Bit coin Mining\
X1 = Memory Optimised = SAP HANA/Apache Spark, etc.\
Z1D = High Compute, High memory = EDA, databes with high per core licensing\
A1 = Arm-Based workload\
U-6tb1 = Bare Metal = Eliminates virtualization overhead

**Accronym: FIGHT DR. MC PiXZ in AUstralia**

### Changing the size of an instance type

1. Stop the running instance
2. Choose the instance > Change Instance Type
3. Start the stopped instance

## EC2 instance Creation

1. Select AMI
2. Select Instance Type (supported by choosen AMI)
3. Configure EC2 properties
	- Set Network and Subnet
	- Set Purchasing Option (on-demand, reserved or spot)
4. Add Storage
	- There is one root volume.
	- Multiple volumes can be mounted as per requirement.
5. Add Tags
6. Configure Security Group (For setting inbound and outbound rules) 

## EC2 Termination Protection

- As name suggests, termination protection prevents a machine from being terminated.
- Termination protection needs to be turned off explicitly for an instance to be terminated.

## EC2 Volume Encryption

- Volume encryption allows us to encrypt an entire volume using AWS-KMS keys
- It is not possible to encrypt root volume on creation (was possible when I tried to create, maybe feature was introduced recently)
- All other volumes that is being added can be encrypted

## EC2 Bootstrapping

- While launching new instances you have the option run a script at boot time.  
- When launching the instance, you have a configuration option called UserData which is where you would write out either a shell script for a Linux or batch script/power-shell script for Windows instance.
- This feature is known as bootstrapping and enables you to run commands, install software or download updates to your instance at first launch.

## EC2 Allocating Elastic Public IPs

- The public IP allocated to any instance (by default) is a changing IP (changes everytime you stop/start)
- Assigning elastic IP : 
	1. EC2 dashboard > Elastic IPs
	2. Click Allocate New Address Button
	3. Select Type Instance, Instance name and Private IP of instance (to forward requests to)
- Changing EC2 machines w/o changing the public IP will be possible with Elastic IP.
- **Note:** AWS will charge you only for un-associated elastic IPs, so you have to make sure that if you delete the instance and don't wish to use the associated IP anymore, delete it.

## EC2 Adding additional network interface

- Use Cases

	1. Application requiring different network for management ans service.
	2. Application itself requires 2 or more networks interfaces.

- Assigning new Network Interface
	1. EC2 dashboard > Network Interface > Create Network Interface Button
	2. Choose options :
		- Description
		- Subnet
		- Private IP (Auto-assign or Custom)
		- Security Group

-  Attach the created Network Interface to EC2 Instance
	1. EC2 dashboard > EC2
	2. Choose an EC2 instance > Actions > Networking > Attach Network Interface
	3. Select the available Netwrok Interface

- Assigning Elastic IP to netowkr interface,
	1. EC2 dashboard > Elastic IPs
	2. Click Allocate New Address Button
	3. Select Type Network Interface, Network interface name and Private IP of network interface (to forward requests to)

## EC2 Optimising Costs

## EC2 Exam Tips

- If EC2 spot instances are terminated by Amazon, you will be not charged for partial hour usage.
	e.g: if it is terminated after 1 hour 30 minutes of usage you will only be charged for 1 hour.
But if it user terminates the instance, then you will be charged for the complete hour
	e.g: if you terminate it after 1 hour 30 minutes of usage you will be charged for 2 hours.
- Termination Protection is turned off by default, you must turn it ON.
- When an EC2 instance is created the adjoining "root" EBS volume is deleted by default, you must turn it off for it to persist.
- (Doubtful) It is not possible to encrypt "root" EBS volume on creation, it has to be encrypted using 3rd party tools like bitlocker.
- To get information about an instace following URL can be used:
	- curl http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data = returns information like internal IP, etc.
	- curl http://169.254.169.254/latest/user-data = returns bootstrap script that was submitted by user during creation.
		- 169.254.169.254 is a fixed IP only assecible from within the cluster

# Security Groups

- Security Groups allow user to set Inbound and Outbound rules.
- Multiple EC2 instances can be added within a security group. 
	- All EC2 instances belonging to this Security Group will follow the rules mentioned in it.
- An EC2 instance can be attached with multple Security Groups.
	- Effective Rule will be an addition of all the rules.

## Security Groups Exam Tips

- All *Inbound Traffic* is blocked by Default.
- All *Outbound Traffic* is Allowed.
- Changes to Security rules take effect immediately
- Security group are *STATEFUL*
	- All Allowed Inbound traffic are allowed back out
	- Similarly all Outbound traffic are also allowed back in, even if that rule does not exist in Inbound Ruleset
- There is no such thing as *DENY* rules in Security groups (use Network ACLs for this)
- Also, you cannot block a certain IP using Security Groups (use Network ACLs for this)

# AWS CloudWatch

- Cloudwatch is a service monitoring tool that can moniter usage of services like,
	A. Compute
		1. EC2 Instances
		2. Autoscaling Groups
		3. Elastic Load Balancers
		4. Route53 Health Checks
	B. Storage
		1. EBS Volumes
		2. Storge Gateways
		3. CloudFront
- Metrics that can be monitored by cloudwatch includes,
	1. CPU
	2. Network
	3. Disk
	4. Status Check
- Cloudwatch by default monitors all supported resources in an interval of 5 minutes.
	- One can enable monitoring with an interval of 1 minute, with some additional cost.
- Things possible with cloudwatch:
	- Dashboards = create dashboards displaying only the required metrics
	- Alarms = helps you create alarms when a particular threshold is hit
	- Events = helps you respond to state change alerts (trigger a lambda)
	- Logs = aggregate, monitor and store logs
- Cloudwatch alarms can be setup that will trigger notifications (emails) when a particular resource reaches a certain threshold set by us.
- Basically it is a **PERFORMANCE MONITORING TOOL**

# AWS Cloud Trial

- Cloudtrial monitors individual AWS user's activities like,
	1. Management Console actions and
	2. API calls
- Cloudtrial includes information like,
	1. which user and accounts called AWS-KMS
	2. the source IP addr.
	3. time of call 
- Basically it is an **AUDITING TOOL**